Let's take another step back and learn about the fundamentals of how asynchronous code works in javascript.
By learning about the event loop and the queue our objectives will be to define the event loop in the
queue.
Describe how the event loop in the queue worked together with the stack and finally to define javascript
as a single threaded language.
We'll start off with the queue.
The queue is an ordered list of functions waiting to be placed on the stack function in the queue are
processed in a first in first out basis.
This is often called FIFO first in first out.
In addition to the queue we will also need to understand the event loop so the event loop is a piece
of functionality in the javascript runtime that checks the queue when the stack is empty.
If the stack is empty the front of the queue is placed on the stack so the function that's waiting in
the queue will be taken off and put on the stack and that's the event loop's job.
Let's see how this queue actually works in practice.
So here we've got an example of set.
Time out.
Pretty simple example we're just calling this callback function that will cancel log Hello world.
But the key here is that we're going to invoke it zero seconds from now.
So most people sort of in their minds intuitively think log is going to happen immediately.
Well not exactly let's see what actually happens.
So we got our main function on the stack and that main function is going to start out by invoking the
set timeout method.
So set time will be placed on the stack and also that timeout does is takes that callback function that
we want to run and places it in the queue.
In this example it will be placed in the queue 0 seconds from now.
So immediately placed in the queue.
OK now we're finishing up with set time out.
It will be popped off the stack and then after that our main function will finish up.
So we're all done there and now our stack is empty.
So the next step here is how does the function get from the queue to the stack.
Well as we talked about before that's the job of the event loop the event loop will check the queue
and see if there's anything there.
If there is it will take it out of the queue and place it on the stack so our callback function that
just cancel logs hello world will be taken from the queue and placed in the stack by the event loop.
So cancel that log will be placed on the stack as another function that gets invoked.
We will print Hello World to the console and then cancel that log will come off the stack.
And finally our callback function will finish up.
And now we're all done.
The stack is empty and the queue is empty so there's no more work to do.
For the time being let's take a look at a little more complicated example now.
So in this one.
This again illustrates how the stack in the queue work together and specifically a common error that
people run into again is when you invoke set time out with a wait time of 0.
It's not actually zero seconds it doesn't run immediately.
It only runs after the stack is empty and we'll see that again.
So in this example we've got some code that squares a number and before that we've also got her invocation
of said time out.
Let's take a look and see what happens.
First our main function is on the stack and we're going to invoke that timeout.
So set time out will be placed on the stack.
Next set time out will place that function on the queue.
So our callback function with the console log will be added to the queue and then said time out will
finish and come off of the stack.
After that we're done with a set time function will move onto line number 7 and 9 7.
The first thing we have to do is square a number.
Now notice here that nothing's happened to the console yet and nothing nothing has been placed on the
stack from the queue.
So this callback function down here is still waiting to be run.
Waiting for the stack to empty.
So now we're going to invoke square one line number two and we're passing in the number two for N.
So two times two will give us four.
Once we return four squares going to come off of the stack and we'll be back on line number seven in
our main function and then we'll put Konsole log on the stack
console log will add four to the console because that's the result of our square function.
So we'll see for and then console log will come off of the stack.
And finally our main function will come off of the stack.
So now there's no more work to be done in the stack and the next thing that happens again is the event
loop.
So the event loop checks the queue once the stack is empty and sees if there's anything to be done in
the queue.
The event loop sees that there's a function in the queue and then places that on the stack.
And at this point we finally have our callback function running.
So we're on line number five in our callback and console log will be placed on the stack.
We'll see callback was placed on the queue in our consul and then cancel log will be taken off the stack
or callback function will be taken off the stack and then our code is done.
So the key thing there in that example was that this callback even though we set a set time out of 0
did not actually get invoked until after the stack was empty and after the event loop has taken it off
the queue and placed it on the stack.
Very important concept there.
This leads to the next important point in javascript.
The fact that javascript is a single threaded language so single threaded means that code execution
is linear code that is running cannot be interrupted by something else going on in the program.
And that's sort of illustrated in the last example you saw that there was a callback function that was
supposed to be run 0 seconds from now but it can't be run until other work finishes.
Let's see another example that helps illustrate that.
So in this single threaded example we again have a set time out that's going to be invoked 0 seconds
from now.
But that's not really zero seconds it's approximately zero seconds.
It really means invoke that callback function after the stack is empty.
So after we've invoked set timeout we have this for loop.
And the point here is that this for loop is going to take a while.
So even though the set time out said run in zero seconds it can't run until this for loop finishes.
And this for loop is going to take some time because if you notice here we're going from equal zero
to equals I think 1 billion.
One a lot of zeros.
So this loop is going to take some time.
And then after that we'll cancel out of the loop and only after that.
Our callback function run.
So lots of steps here before this callback function actually gets invoked.
Let's see that in the consul.
So I've got our code right here.
And the thing to notice again is that the done with the loop and then the hello from the time out won't
be invoked or won't be put in the console until after our loop is finished.
So as you can see here the done with loop took some time and then only after everything was off the
stack.
Hello from the time out was invoked and put in the consul.
Great work so far.
Next up we're going to take a quiz on the concepts you learned in this section.
Good luck.